# Day 27 — Dante and Beatrice in Paradise

*Dante fell madly in love with Beatrice at first sight; but it is doubted if he ever spoke to her in this world. He tells of his happy meeting with Beatrice in Paradise.*

*(Dante victim of political persecution in Florence, Jan. 27, 1302.)*

---

Canto XXX
ARGUMENT.—Beatrice descends from Heaven, and rebukes the Poet.

SOON as that polar light, fair ornament

Of the first Heaven, which hath never known

Setting nor rising, nor the shadowy veil

Of other cloud than sin, to duty there

Each one convoying, as that lower doth

The steersman to his port, stood firmly fix’d;

Forthwith the saintly tribe, who in the van

Between the Gryphon and its radiance came,

Did turn them to the car, as to their rest:

And one, as if commission’d from above,

In holy chant thrice shouted forth aloud;

“Come, spouse! from Libanus:” and all the rest

Took up the song.—At the last audit, so

The blest shall rise, from forth his cavern each

Uplifting lightly his new-vested flesh;

As, on the sacred litter, at the voice

Authoritative of that elder, sprang

A hundred ministers and messengers

Of life eternal. “Blessed thou, who comest!”

And, “Oh!” they cried, “from full hands scatter ye

Unwithering lilies”: and, so saying, cast

Flowers overhead and round them on all sides.

I have beheld, ere now, at break of day,

The eastern clime all roseate; and the sky

Opposed, one deep and beautiful serene;

And the sun’s face so shaded, and with mists

Attemper’d, at his rising, that the eye

Long while endured the sight: thus, in a cloud

Of flowers, that from those hands angelic rose,

And down within and outside of the car

Fell showering, in white veil with olive wreathed,

A virgin in my view appear’d, beneath

Green mantle, robed in hue of living flame:

And o’er my spirit, that so long a time

Had from her presence felt no shuddering dread,

Albeit mine eyes discern’d her not, there moved

A hidden virtue from her, at whose touch

The power of ancient love was strong within me.

No sooner on my vision streaming, smote

The heavenly influence, which, years past, and e’en

In childhood, thrill’d me, than towards Virgil I

Turn’d me to leftward; panting, like a babe,

That flees for refuge to his mother’s breast,

If aught have terrified or work’d him woe:

And would have cried, “There is no dram of blood,

That doth not quiver in me. The old flame

Throws out clear tokens of reviving fire.”

But Virgil had bereaved us of himself;

Virgil, my best-loved father, Virgil, he

To whom I gave me up for safety: nor

All, our prime mother lost, avail’d to save

My undew’d cheeks from blur of soiling tears.

“Dante! weep not that Virgil leaves thee; nay,

Weep thou not yet: behoves thee feel the edge

Of other sword; and thou shalt weep for that.”

As to the prow or stern, some admiral

Paces the deck, inspiriting his crew,

When ’mid the sail-yards all hands ply aloof;

Thus, on the left side of the car, I saw

(Turning me at the sound of mine own name,

Which here I am compell’d to register)

The virgin station’d, who before appear’d

Veil’d in that festive shower angelical.

Towards me, across the stream, she bent her eyes;

Though from her brow the veil descending, bound

With foliage of Minerva, suffer’d not

That I beheld her clearly: then with act

Full royal, still insulting o’er her thrall,

Added, as one who, speaking, keepeth back

The bitterest saying, to conclude the speech:

“Observe me well. I am, in sooth, I am

Beatrice. What! and hast thou deign’d at last

Approach the mountain? Knewest not, O man!

Thy happiness is here?” Down fell mine eyes

On the clear fount; but there, myself espying,

Recoil’d, and sought the greensward; such a weight

Of shame was on my forehead. With a mien

Of that stern majesty, which doth surround

A mother’s presence to her awe-struck child,

She look’d; a flavor of such bitterness

Was mingled in her pity. There her words

Brake off; and suddenly the angels sang,

“In thee, O gracious Lord! my hope hath been”:

But went no further than, “Thou, Lord! hast set

My feet in ample room” As snow, that lies,

Amidst the living rafters on the back

Of Italy, congeal’d, when drifted high

And closely piled by rough Sclavonian blasts;

Breathe but the land whereon no shadow falls,

And straightway melting it distills away,

Like a fire-wasted taper: thus was I,

Without a sigh or tear, or ever these

Did sing, that, with the chiming of Heaven’s sphere,

Still in their warbling chime: but when the strain

Of dulcet symphony express’d for me

Their soft compassion, more than could the words,

“Virgin! why so consumest him?” then, the ice

Congeal’d about my bosom, turn’d itself

To spirit and water; and with anguish forth

Gush’d, through the lips and eyelids, from the heart.

Upon the chariot’s same edge still she stood,

Immovable; and thus address’d her words

To those bright semblances with pity touch’d:

“Ye in the eternal day your vigils keep;

So that nor night nor slumber, with close stealth,

Conveys from you a single step, in all

The goings on of time: thence, with more heed

I shape mine answer, for his ear intended,

Who there stands weeping; that the sorrow now

May equal the transgression. Not alone

Through operation of the mighty orbs,

That mark each seed to some predestined aim,

As with aspect or fortunate or ill

The constellations meet; but through benign

Largess of heavenly graces, which rain down

From such a height as mocks our vision, this man

Was, in the freshness of his being, such,

So gifted virtually, that in him

All better habits wondrously had thrived

The more of kindly strength is in the soil,

So much doth evil seed and lack of culture

Mar it the more, and make it run to wildness.

These looks sometime upheld him; for I show’d

My youthful eyes, and led him by their light

In upright walking. Soon as I had reach’d

Tee threshold of my second age, and changed

My mortal for immortal; then he left me,

And gave himself to others. When from flesh

To spirit I had risen, and increase

Of beauty and of virtue circled me,

I was less dear to him, and valued less.

His steps were turn’d into deceitful ways,

Following false images of good, that make

No promise perfect. Nor avail’d me aught

To sue for inspirations, with the which,

I, both in dreams of night, and otherwise,

Did call him back; of them, so little reck’d him.

Such depth he fell, that all device was short

Of his preserving, save that he should view

The children of perdition. To this end

I visited the purlieus of the dead:

And one, who hath conducted him thus high,

Received my supplications urged with weeping.

It were a breaking of God’s high decree,

If Lethe should be pass’d, and such food tasted,

Without the cost of some repentant tear.”

Canto XXXI
ARGUMENT.—Beatrice continues her reprehension of Dante, who confesses his error, and falls to the ground; coming to himself again, he is by Matilda drawn through the waters of Lethe, and presented first to the four virgins who figure the cardinal virtues; these in their turn lead him to the Gryphon, a symbol of our Saviour; and the three virgins, representing the evangelical virtues, intercede for him with Beatrice, that she would display to him her second beauty.

“O THOU!” her words she thus without delay

Resuming, turn’d their point on me, to whom

They, with but lateral edge, seem’d harsh before:

“Say thou, who stand’st beyond the holy stream,

If this be true. A charge, so grievous, needs

Thine own avowal.” On my faculty

Such strange amazement hung, the voice expired

Imperfect, ere its organs gave it birth.

A little space refraining, then she spake:

“What dost thou muse on? Answer me. The wave

On thy remembrances of evil yet

Hath done no injury.” A mingled sense

Of fear and of confusion, from my lips

Did such a “Yea” produce, as needed help

Of vision to interpret. As when breaks,

In act to be discharged, a cross-bow bent

Beyond its pitch, both nerve and bow o’erstretch’d;

The flagging weapon feebly hits the mark:

Thus, tears and sighs forth gushing, did I burst,

Beneath the heavy load: and thus my voice

Was slacken’d on its way. She straight began:

“When my desire invited thee to love

The good, which sets a bound to our aspirings;

What bar of thwarting foss or linked chain

Did meet thee, that thou so shouldst quit the hope

Of further progress? or what bait of ease,

Or promise of allurement, led thee on

Elsewhere, that thou elsewhere shouldst rather wait?”

A bitter sigh I drew, then scarce found voice

To answer; hardly to these sounds my lips

Gave utterance, wailing: “Thy fair looks withdrawn,

Things present, with deceitful pleasures, turn’d

My steps aside.” She answering spake: “Hadst thou

Been silent, or denied what thou avow’st,

Thou hadst not hid thy sin the more; such eye

Observes it. But whene’er the sinner’s cheek

Breaks forth into the precious-streaming tears

Of self-accusing, in our court the wheel

Of justice doth run counter to the edge.

Howe’er, that thou mayst profit by thy shame

For errors past, and that henceforth more strength

May arm thee, when thou hear’st the Syren-voice;

Lay thou aside the motive to this grief,

And lend attentive ear, while I unfold

How opposite a way my buried flesh

Should have impell’d thee. Never didst thou spy,

In art or nature, aught so passing sweet,

As were the limbs that in their beauteous frame

Enclosed me, and are scatter’d now in dust.

If sweetest thing thus fail’d thee with my death,

What, afterward, of moral, should thy wish

Have tempted? When thou first hadst felt the dart

Of perishable things, in my departing

For better realms, thy wing thou shouldst have pruned

To follow me; and never stoop’d again,

To ’bide a second blow, for a slight girl,

Or other gaud as transient and as vain.

The new and inexperienced bird awaits,

Twice it may be, or thrice, the fowler’s aim;

But in the sight of one whose plumes are full,

In vain the net is spread, the arrow wing’d.”

I stood, as children silent and ashamed

Stand, listening, with their eyes upon the earth,

Acknowledging their fault, and self-condemn’d.

And she resumed: “If, but to hear, thus pains thee,

Raise thou thy beard, and lo! what sight shall do.”

With less reluctance yields a sturdy holm,

Rent from its fibres by a blast, that blows

From off the pole, or from Iarbas’ land,

Than I at her behest my visage raised:

And thus the face denoting by the beard,

I mark’d the secret sting her words convey’d.

No sooner lifted I mine aspect up,

Than I perceived those primal creatures cease

Their flowery sprinkling; and mine eyes beheld

(Yet unassured and wavering in their view)

Beatrice; she, who toward the mystic shape,

That joins two natures in one form, had turn’d:

And, even under shadow of her veil,

And parted by the verdant rill that flow’d

Between, in loveliness she seem’d as much

Her former self surpassing, as on earth

All others she surpass’d. Remorseful goads

Shot sudden through me. Each thing else, the more

Its love had late beguiled me, now the more

Was loathsome. On my heart so keenly smote

The bitter consciousness, that on the ground

O’erpower’d I fell: and what my state was then,

She knows, who was the cause. When now my strength

Flow’d back, returning outward from the heart,

The lady, whom alone I first had seen,

I found above me. “Loose me not,” she cried:

“Loose not thy hold:” and lo! had dragg’d me high

As to my neck into the stream; while she,

Still as she drew me after, swept along,

Swift as a shuttle, bounding o’er the wave.

The blessed shore approaching, then was heard

So sweetly, “Tu asperges me,” that I

May not remember, much less tell the sound.

The beauteous dame, her arms expanding, clasp’d

My temples, and immerged me where ’twas fit

The wave should drench me: and, thence raising up,

Within the fourfold dance of lovely nymphs

Presented me so laved; and with their arm

They each did cover me. “Here are we nymphs,

And in the heaven are stars. Or ever earth

Was visited of Beatrice, we,

Appointed for her handmaids, tended on her.

We to her eyes will lead thee: but the light

Of gladness, that is in them, well to scan,

Those yonder three, of deeper ken than ours,

Thy sight shall quicken.” Thus began their song:

And then they led me to the Gryphon’s breast,

Where, turn’d toward us, Beatrice stood.

“Spare not thy vision. We have station’d thee

Before the emeralds, whence love, erewhile,

Hath drawn his weapons on thee.” As they spake,

A thousand fervent wishes riveted

Mine eyes upon her beaming eyes, that stood,

Still fix’d toward the Gryphon, motionless.

As the sun strikes a mirror, even thus

Within those orbs the twofold being shone;

Forever varying, in one figure now

Reflected, now in other. Reader! muse

How wondrous in my sight it seem’d, to mark

A thing, albeit steadfast in itself,

Yet in its imaged semblance mutable.

Full of amaze, and joyous, while my soul

Fed on the viand, whereof still desire

Grows with satiety; the other three,

With gesture that declared a loftier line,

Advanced: to their own carol, on they came

Dancing, in festive ring angelical.

“Turn, Beatrice!” was their song: “Oh! turn

Thy saintly sight on this thy faithful one,

Who, to behold thee, many a wearisome pace

Hath measured. Gracious at our prayer, vouchsafe

Unveiled to him thy cheeks; that he may mark

Thy second beauty, now conceal’d.” O splendour!

O sacred light eternal! who is he,

So pale with musing in Pierian shades,

Or with that fount so lavishly imbued,

Whose spirit should not fail him in the essay

To represent thee such as thou didst seem,

When under cope of the still-chiming Heaven

Thou gavest to open air thy charms reveal’d?

Canto XXXII
ARGUMENT.—Dante is warned not to gaze too fixedly on Beatrice. The procession moves on, accompanied by Matilda, Statius, and Dante, till they reach an exceeding lofty tree, where divers strange chances befall.

MINE eyes with such an eager coveting

Were bent to rid them of their ten years’ thirst,

Not other sense was waking: and e’en they

Were fenced on either side from heed of aught;

So tangled, in its custom’d toils, that smile

Of saintly brightness drew me to itself:

When forcibly, toward the left, my sight

The sacred virgins turn’d; for from their lips

I heard the warning sounds: “Too fix’d a gaze!”

A while my vision labour’d; as when late

Upon the o’erstrained eyes the sun hath smote:

But soon, to lesser object, as the view

Was now recover’d, (lesser in respect

To that excess of sensible, whence late

I had perforce been sunder’d), on their right

I mark’d that glorious army wheel, and turn,

Against the sun and sevenfold lights, their front.

As when, their bucklers for protection raised,

A well-ranged troop, with portly banners curl’d,

Wheel circling, ere the whole can change their ground;

E’en thus the goodly regiment of Heaven

Proceeding, all did pass us, ere the car

Had sloped his beam. Attendant at the wheels

The damsels turn’d; and on the Gryphon moved

The sacred burden, with a pace so smooth,

No feather on him trembled. The fair dame,

Who through the wave had drawn me, companied

By Statius and myself, pursued the wheel,

Whose orbit, rolling, mark’d a lesser arch.

Through the high wood, now void, (the more her blame,

Who by the serpent was beguiled), I pass’d,

With step in cadence to the harmony

Angelic. Onward had we moved, as far,

Perchance, as arrow at three several flights

Full wing’d had sped, when from her station down

Descended Beatrice. With one voice

All murmur’d “Adam”; circling next a plant

Despoil’d of flowers and leaf, on every bough,

Its tresses, spreading more as more they rose,

Were such, as ’midst their forest wilds, for height,

The Indians might have gazed at. “Blessed thou,

Gryphon! whose beak hath never pluck’d that tree

Pleasant to taste: for hence the appetite

Was warp’d to evil.” Round the stately trunk

Thus shouted forth the rest, to whom return’d

The animal twice-gender’d: “Yea! for so

The generation of the just are saved.”

And turning to the chariot-pole, to foot

He drew it of the widow’d branch, and bound

There, left unto the stock whereon it grew.

As when large floods of radiance from above

Stream, with that radiance mingled, which ascends

Next after setting of the scaly sign,

Our plants then burgeon, and each wears anew

His wonted colours, ere the sun have yoked

Beneath another star his flamy steeds;

Thus putting forth a hue more faint than rose,

And deeper than the violet, was renew’d

The plant, erewhile in all its branches bare.

Unearthly was the hymn, which then arose.

I understood it not, nor to the end

Endured the harmony. Had I the skill

To pencil forth how closed the unpitying eyes

Slumbering, when Syrinx warbled, (eyes that paid

So dearly for their watching), then, like painter,

That with a model paints, I might design

The manner of my falling into sleep.

But feign who will the slumber cunningly,

I pass it by to when I waked; and tell,

How suddenly a flash of splendour rent

The curtain of my sleep, and one cries out,

“Arise; what dost thou?” As the chosen three,

On Tabor’s mount, admitted to behold

The blossoming of that fair tree, whose fruit

Is coveted of Angels, and doth make

Perpetual feast in Heaven; to themselves

Returning, at the word whence deeper sleeps

Were broken, they their tribe diminish’d saw;

Both Moses and Elias gone, and changed

The stole their Master wore; thus to myself

Returning, over me beheld I stand

The piteous one, who, cross the stream, had brought

My steps. “And where,” all doubting, I exclaim’d,

“Is Beatrice?”—“See her,” she replied,

“Beneath the fresh leaf, seated on its root.

Behold the associate choir that circles her.

The others, with a melody more sweet

And more profound, journeying to higher realms,

Upon the Gryphon tend.” If there her words

Were closed, I know not; but mine eyes had now

Ta’en view of her, by whom all other thoughts

Were barr’d admittance. On the very ground

Alone she sat, as she had there been left

A guard upon the wain, which I beheld

Bound to the twyform beast. The seven nymphs

Did make themselves a cloister round about her;

And, in their hands, upheld those lights secure

From blast septentrion and the gusty south.

“A little while thou shalt be forester here;

And citizen shalt be, forever with me,

Of that true Rome, wherein Christ dwells a Roman,

To profit the misguided world, keep now

Thine eyes upon the car; and what thou seest,

Take heed thou write, returning to that place.”

Thus Beatrice: at whose feet inclined

Devout, at her behest, my thought and eyes

I, as she bade, directed. Never fire,

With so swift motion, forth a stormy cloud

Leap’d downward from the welkin’s farthest bound,

As I beheld the bird of Jove, descend

Down through the tree; and, as he rush’d, the rind

Disparting crush beneath him; buds much more,

And leaflets. On the car, with all his might

He struck; whence, staggering, like a ship it reel’d,

At random driven, to starboard now, o’ercome,

And now to larboard, by the vaulting waves.

Next, springing up into the chariot’s womb,

A fox I saw, with hunger seeming pined

Of all good food. But, for his ugly sins

The saintly maid rebuking him, away

Scampering he turn’d, fast as his hide-bound corpse

Would bear him. Next, from whence before he came,

I saw the eagle dart into the hull

O’ the car, and leave it with his feathers lined:

And then a voice, like that which issues forth

From heart with sorrow rived, did issue forth

From Heaven, and “O poor bark of mine!” it cried,

“How badly art thou freighted.” Then it seem’d

That the earth open’d, between either wheel;

And I beheld a dragon issue thence,

That through the chariot fix’d his forked train;

And like a wasp, that draggeth back the sting,

So drawing forth his baleful train, he dragg’d

Part of the bottom forth; and went his way,

Exulting. What remain’d, as lively turf

With green herb, so did clothe itself with plumes,

Which haply had, with purpose chaste and kind,

Been offer’d; and therewith were clothed the wheels,

Both one and other, and the beam, so quickly,

A sigh were not breathed sooner. Thus transform’d,

The holy structure, through its several parts,

Did put forth heads; three on the beam, and one

On every side: the first like oxen horn’d;

But with a single horn upon their front,

The four. Like monster, sight hath never seen.

O’er it methought there sat, secure as rock

On mountain’s lofty top, a shameless whore,

Whose ken roved loosely round her. At her side,

As ’t were that none might bear her off, I saw

A giant stand; and ever and anon

They mingled kisses. But, her lustful eyes

Chancing on me to wander, that fell minion

Scourged her from head to foot all o’er; then full

Of jealousy, and fierce with rage, unloosed

The monster, and dragg’d on, so far across

The forest, that from me its shades alone

Shielded the harlot and the new-form’d brute.

— *The Harvard Classics, Vol. 20, pp. 267–279 (via bartleby.com)*
