# Day 2 — School-Day Poems of John Milton

*At the age of sixteen, Milton first appeared before the public eye as a promising young poet. These early verses, written while he was a boy in school, indicate his brilliant future.*

*(First edition of Milton's collected poems published Jan. 2, 1645.)*

---

I
THIS is the month, and this the happy morn,

Wherein the Son of Heaven’s eternal King,

Of wedded maid and Virgin Mother born,

Our great redemption from above did bring;

For so the holy sages once did sing,

That he our deadly forfeit should release,

And with his Father work us a perpetual peace.

II
That glorious Form, that Light unsufferable,

And that far-beaming blaze of majesty,

Wherewith he wont at Heaven’s high council-table

To sit the midst of Trinal Unity,

He laid aside, and, here with us to be,

Forsook the Courts of everlasting Day,

And chose with us a darksome house of mortal clay.

III
Say, Heavenly Muse, shall not thy sacred vein

Afford a present to the Infant God?

Hast thou no verse, no hymn, or solemn strain,

To welcome him to this his new abode,

Now while the heaven, by the Sun’s team untrod,

Hath took no print of the approaching light,

And all the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright?

IV
See how from far upon the Eastern road

The star-led Wisards haste with odours sweet!

Oh! run; prevent them with thy humble ode,

And lay it lowly at his blessèd feet;

Have thou the honour first thy Lord to greet,

And join thy voice unto the Angel Quire,

From out his secret altar touched with hallowed fire.

The Hymn
I
It was the winter wild,

While the heaven-born child

All meanly wrapt in the rude manger lies;

Nature, in awe to him,

Had doffed her gaudy trim,

With her great Master so to sympathize:

It was no season then for her

To wanton with the Sun, her lusty Paramour.

II
Only with speeches fair

She woos the gentle air

To hide her guilty front with innocent snow,

And on her naked shame,

Pollute with sinful blame,

The saintly veil of maiden white to throw;

Confounded, that her Maker’s eyes

Should look so near upon her foul deformities.

III
But he, her fears to cease,

Sent down the meek-eyed Peace:

She, crowned with olive green, came softly sliding

Down through the turning sphere,

His ready Harbinger,

With turtle wing the amorous clouds dividing;

And, waving wide her myrtle wand,

She strikes a universal peace through sea and land.

IV
No war, or battail’s sound,

Was heard the world around;

The idle spear and shield were high uphung;

The hookèd chariot stood,

Unstained with hostile blood;

The trumpet spake not to the armèd throng;

And Kings sat still with awful eye,

As if they surely knew their sovran Lord was by.

V
But peaceful was the night

Wherein the Prince of Light

His reign of peace upon the earth began.

The winds, with wonder whist,

Smoothly the waters kissed,

Whispering new joys to the mild Ocean,

Who now hath quite forgot to rave,

While birds of calm sit brooding on the charmed wave.

VI
The stars, with deep amaze,

Stand fixed in steadfast gaze,

Bending one way their precious influence,

And will not take their flight,

For all the morning light,

Or Lucifer that often warned them thence;

But in their glimmering orbs did glow,

Until their Lord himself bespake, and bid them go.

VII
And, though the shady gloom

Had given day her room,

The Sun himself withheld his wonted speed,

And hid his head of shame,

As his inferior flame

The new-enlightened world no more should need:

He saw a greater Sun appear

Than his bright Throne or burning axletree could bear.

VIII
The Shepherds on the lawn,

Or ere the point of dawn,

Sat simply chatting in a rustic row;

Full little thought they than

That the mighty Pan

Was kindly come to live with them below:

Perhaps their loves, or else their sheep,

Was all that did their silly thoughts so busy keep.

IX
When such music sweet

Their hearts and ears did greet

As never was by mortal finger strook,

Divinely-warbled voice

Answering the stringèd noise,

As all their souls in blissful rapture took:

The air, such pleasure loth to lose,

With thousand echoes still prolongs each heavenly close.

X
Nature, that heard such sound

Beneath the hollow round

Of Cynthia’s seat the airy Region thrilling,

Now was almost won

To think her part was done,

And that her reign had here its last fulfilling:

She knew such harmony alone

Could hold all Heaven and Earth in happier union.

XI
At last surrounds their sight

A globe of circular light,

That with long beams the shamefaced Night arrayed;

The helmèd Cherubim

And sworded Seraphim

Are seen in glittering ranks with wings displayed,

Harping in loud and solemn quire,

With unexpressive notes, to Heaven’s newborn Heir.

XII
Such music (as ’tis said)

Before was never made,

But when of old the Sons of Morning sung,

While the Creator great

His constellations set,

And the well-balanced World on hinges hung,

And cast the dark foundations deep,

And bid the weltering waves their oozy channel keep.

XIII
Ring out, ye crystal spheres!

Once bless our human ears,

If ye have power to touch our senses so;

And let your silver chime

Move in melodious time;

And let the bass of heaven’s deep organ blow;

And with your ninefold harmony

Make up full consort of the angelic symphony.

XIV
For, if such holy song

Enwrap our fancy long,

Time will run back and fetch the Age of Gold;

And speckled Vanity

Will sicken soon and die,

And leprous Sin will melt from earthly mould;

And Hell itself will pass away,

And leave her dolorous mansions of the peering day.

XV
Yes, Truth and Justice then

Will down return to men,

The enamelled arras of the rainbow wearing;

And Mercy set between,

Throned in celestial sheen,

With radiant feet the tissued clouds down steering;

And Heaven, as at some festival,

Will open wide the gates of her high palace-hall.

XVI
But wisest Fate says No,

This must not yet be so;

The Babe lies yet in smiling infancy

That on the bitter cross

Must redeem our loss,

So both himself and us to glorify:

Yet first, to those chained in sleep,

The wakeful trump of doom must thunder through the deep,

XVII
With such a horrid clang

As on Mount Sinai rang,

While the red fire and smouldering clouds outbrake:

The aged Earth, aghast

With terror of that blast,

Shall from the surface to the centre shake,

When, at the world’s last sessiön,

The dreadful Judge in middle air shall spread his throne.

XVIII
And then at last our bliss

Full and perfect is,

But now begins; for from this happy day

The Old Dragon under ground,

In straiter limits bound,

Not half so far casts his usurpèd sway,

And, wroth to see his Kingdom fail,

Swindges the scaly horror of his folded tail.

XIX
The Oracles are dumb;

No voice or hideous hum

Runs through the archèd roof in words deceiving.

Apollo from his shrine

Can no more divine,

Will hollow shriek the steep of Delphos leaving.

No nightly trance, or breathèd spell,

Inspires the pale-eyed Priest from the prophetic cell.

XX
The lonely mountains o’er,

And the resounding shore,

A voice of weeping heard and loud lament;

Edgèd with poplar pale,

From haunted spring, and dale

The parting Genius is with sighing sent;

With flower-inwoven tresses torn

The Nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn.

XXI
In consecrated earth,

And on the holy hearth,

The Lars and Lemures moan with midnight plaint;

In urns, and altars round,

A drear and dying sound

Affrights the Flamens at their service quaint;

And the chill marble seems to sweat,

While each peculiar power forgoes his wonted seat.

XXII
Peor and Baälim

Forsake their temples dim,

With that twice-battered god of Palestine;

And moonèd Ashtaroth,

Heaven’s Queen and Mother both,

Now sits not girt with tapers’ holy shine:

The Libyc Hammon shrinks his horn;

In vain the Tyrian maids their wounded Thammuz mourn.

XXIII
And sullen Moloch, fled,

Hath left in shadows dread

His burning idol all of blackest hue;

In vain with cymbals’ ring

They call the grisly king,

In dismal dance about the furnace blue;

The brutish gods of Nile as fast,

Isis, and Orus, and the dog Anubis, haste.

XXIV
Nor is Osiris seen

In Memphian grove or green,

Trampling the unshowered grass with lowings loud;

Nor can he be at rest

Within his sacred chest;

Nought but profoundest Hell can be his shroud;

In vain, with timbreled anthems dark,

The sable-stolèd Sorcerers bear his worshiped ark.

XXV
He feels from Juda’s land

The dreaded Infant’s hand;

The rays of Bethlehem blind his dusky eyn;

Nor all the gods beside

Longer dare abide,

Not Typhon huge ending in snaky twine:

Our Babe, to show his Godhead true,

Can in his swaddling bands control the damnèd crew.

XXVI
So, when the Sun in bed,

Curtained with cloudy red,

Pillows his chin upon an orient wave,

The flocking shadows pale

Troop to the infernal jail,

Each fettered ghost slips to his several grave,

And the yellow-skirted Fays

Fly after the night-steeds, leaving their moon-loved maze.

XXVII
But see! the Virgin blest

Hath laid her Babe to rest,

Time is our tedious song should here have ending:

Heaven’s youngest-teemèd star

Hath fixed her polished car,

Her sleeping Lord with handmaid lamp attending;

And all about the courtly stable

Bright-harnessed Angels sit in order serviceable.

LET us with a gladsome mind

Praise the Lord for he is kind;

For his mercies aye endure,

Ever faithful, ever sure.

Let us blaze his Name abroad,

For of gods he is the God;

For his, &c.

O let us his praises tell,

That doth the wrathful tyrants quell;

For his, &c.

That with his miracles doth make

Amazèd Heaven and Earth to shake;

For his, &c.

That by his wisdom did create

The painted heavens so full of state;

For his, &c.

That did the solid Earth ordain

To rise above the watery plain;

For his, &c.

That by his all-commanding might,

Did fill the new-made world with light;

For his, &c.

And caused the golden-tressèd Sun

All the day long his course to run;

For his, &c.

The hornèd Moon to shine by night

Amongst her spangled sisters bright;

For his, &c.

He, with his thunder-clasping hand,

Smote the first-born of Egypt land;

For his, &c.

And, in despite of Pharao fell,

He brought from thence his Israel;

For his, &c.

The ruddy waves he cleft in twain

Of the Erythræan main;

For his, &c.

The floods stood still, like walls of glass,

While the Hebrew bands did pass;

For his, &c.

But full soon they did devour

The tawny King with all his power;

For his, &c.

His chosen people he did bless

In the wasteful Wilderness;

For his, &c.

In bloody battail he brought down

Kings of prowess and renown;

For his, &c.

He foiled bold Seon and his host,

That ruled the Amorrean coast;

For his, &c.

And large-limbed Og he did subdue,

With all his over-hardy crew;

For his, &c.

And to his servant Israel

He gave their land, therein to dwell;

For his, &c.

He hath, with a piteous eye,

Beheld us in our misery;

For his, &c.

And freed us from the slavery

Of the invading enemy;

For his, &c.

All living creatures he doth feed,

And with full hand supplies their need;

For his, &c.

Let us, therefore, warble forth

His mighty majesty and worth;

For his, &c.

That his mansion hath on high,

Above the reach of mortal eye;

For his, &c.

I
O FAIREST Flower, no sooner blown but blasted,

Soft silken Primrose fading timelessly,

Summer’s chief honour, if thou hadst outlasted

Bleak Winter’s force that made thy blossom dry;

For he, being amorous on that lovely dye

That did thy cheek envermeil, thought to kiss

But killed, alas! and then bewailed his fatal bliss.

II
For since grim Aquilo, his charioter,

By boisterous rape the Athenian damsel got,

He thought it touched his Deity full near,

If likewise he some fair one wedded not,

Thereby to wipe away the infámous blot

Of long uncoupled bed and childless eld,

Which, ’mongst the wanton gods, a foul reproach was held.

III
So, mounting up in icy-pearlèd car,

Through middle empire of the freezing air

He wandered long, till thee he spied from far;

There ended was his quest, there ceased his care;

Down he descended from his snow-soft chair,

But, all un’wares, with his cold-kind embrace,

Unhoused thy virgin soul from her fair biding-place.

IV
Yet thou art not inglorious in thy fate;

For so Apollo, with unweeting hand,

Whilom did slay his dearly-lovèd mate,

Young Hyacinth, born on Eurotas’ strand,

Young Hyacinth, the pride of Spartan land;

But then transformed him to a purple flower:

Alack, that so to change thee Winter had no power!

V
Yet can I not persuade me thou art dead,

Or that thy corse corrupts in earth’s dark womb,

Or that thy beauties lie in wormy bed

Hid from the world in a low-delvèd tomb;

Could Heaven, for pity, thee so strictly doom?

Oh no! for something in thy face did shine

Above mortality, that showed thou wast divine.

VI
Resolve me, then, O Soul most surely blest

(If so be it that thou these plaints dost hear)

Tell me, bright Spirit, where’er thou hoverest,

Whether above that high first-moving sphere,

Or in the Elysian fields (if such there were),

Oh, say me true if thou wert mortal wight,

And why from us so quickly thou didst take thy flight.

VII
Wert thou some Star, which from the ruined roof

Of shaked Olympus by mischance didst fall;

Which careful Jove in nature’s true behoof

Took up, and in fit place did reinstall?

Or did of late Earth’s sons besiege the wall

Of sheeny Heaven, and thou some Goddess fled

Amongst us here below to hide thy nectared head?

VIII
Or wert thou that just Maid who once before

Forsook the hated earth, oh! tell me sooth,

And camest again to visit us once more?

Or wert thou [Mercy], that sweet smiling Youth?

Or that crowned Matron, sage white-robèd Truth?

Or any other of that heavenly brood

Let down in cloudy throne to do the world some good?

IX
Or wert thou of the golden-wingèd host,

Who, having clad thyself in human weed,

To earth from thy prefixèd seat didst post,

And after short abode fly back with speed,

As if to shew what creatures Heaven doth breed;

Thereby to set the hearts of men on fire

To scorn the sordid world, and unto Heaven aspire?

X
But oh! why didst thou not stay here below

To bless us with thy heaven-loved innocence,

To slake his wrath whom sin hath made our foe,

To turn swift-rushing black perdition hence,

Or drive away the slaughtering pestilence,

To stand ’twixt us and our deservèd smart?

But thou canst best perform that office where thou art.

XI
Then thou, the mother of so sweet a child,

Her false-imagined loss cease to lament,

And wisely learn to curb thy sorrows wild;

Think what a present thou to God hast sent,

And render him with patience what he lent:

This if thou do, he will an offspring give

That till the world’s last end shall make thy name to live.

The Latin speeches ended, the English thus began:—

HAIL, Native Language, that by sinews weak,

Didst move my first-endeavouring tongue to speak,

And madest imperfect words, with childish trips,

Half unpronounced, slide through my infant lips,

Driving dumb Silence from the portal door,

Where he had mutely sat two years before:

Here I salute thee, and thy pardon ask,

That now I use thee in my latter task:

Small loss it is that thence can come unto thee,

I know my tongue but little grace can do thee.

Thou need’st not be ambitious to be first,

Believe me, I have thither packed the worst:

And, if it happen as I did forecast,

The daintiest dishes shall be served up last.

I pray thee then deny me not thy aid,

For this same small neglect that I have made;

But haste thee straight to do me once a pleasure,

and from thy wardrobe bring thy chieftest treasure;

Not those new-fangled toys, and trimming slight

Which takes our late fantastics with delight;

But cull those richest robes and gayest attire,

Which deepest spirits and choicest wits desire.

I have some naked thoughts that rove about,

And loudly knock to have their passage out,

And, weary of their place, do only stay

Till thou hast decked them in thy best array;

That so they may, without suspect or fears,

Fly swiftly to this fair Assembly’s ears.

Yet I had rather, if I were to choose,

Thy service in some graver subject use,

Such as may make thee search thy coffers round,

Before thou clothe my fancy in fit sound:

Such where the deep transported mind may soar

Above the wheeling poles, and at Heaven’s door

Look in, and see each blissful Deity

How he before the thunderous throne doth lie,

Listening to what unshorn Apollo sings

To the touch of golden wires, while Hebe brings

Immortal nectar to her kingly Sire;

Then, passing through the spheres of watchful fire,

And misty regions of wide air next under,

And hills of snow and lofts of piled thunder,

May tell at length how green-eyed Neptune raves,

In heaven’s defiance mustering all his waves;

Then sing of secret things that came to pass

When beldam Nature in her cradle was;

And last of Kings and Queens and Heroes old,

Such as the wise Demodocus once told

In solemn songs at King Alcinoüs’ feast,

While sad Ulysses’ soul and all the rest

Are held, with his melodious harmony,

In willing chains and sweet captivity.

But fie, my wandering Muse, how thou dost stray!

Expectance calls thee now another way.

Thou know’st it must be now thy only bent

To keep in compass of thy Predicament.

Then quick about thy purposed business come,

That to the next I may resign my room.

Then ENS is represented as Father of the Predicaments, his ten Sons; whereof the eldest stood for SUBSTANCE with his Canons; which ENS, thus speaking, explains:—

Good luck befriend thee, son; for at thy birth

The faery Ladies danced upon the hearth.

The drowsy Nurse hath sworn she did them spy

Come tripping to the room where thou didst lie,

And, sweetly singing round about thy bed,

Strew all their blessings on thy sleeping head.

She heard them give thee this, that thou shouldst still

From eyes of mortals walk invisible.

Yet there is something that doth force my fear;

For once it was my dismal hap to hear

A Sibyl old, bow-bent with crooked age,

That far events full wisely could presage,

And, in Time’s long and dark prospective-glass,

Foresaw that future days should bring to pass.

“Your Son,” said she, “(nor can you it prevent,)

Shall subject be to many an Accident.

O’er all his Brethren he shall reign as King;

Yet every one shall make him underling,

And those that cannot live from him asunder

Ungratefully shall strive to keep him under.

In worth and excellence he shall outgo them;

Yet, being above them, he shall be below them.

From others he shall stand in need of nothing,

Yet on his Brothers shall depend for clothing.

To find a foe it shall not be his hap,

And peace shall lull him in her flowery lap;

Yet shall he live in strife, and at his door

Devouring war shall never cease to roar;

Yea, it shall be his natural property

To harbour those that are at enmity.”

What power, what force, what mighty spell, if not

Your learned hands, can loose this Gordian knot?

The next, QUANTITY and QUALITY, spake in prose: then RELATION was called by his name.

Rivers, arise: whether thou be the son

Of utmost Tweed, or Ouse, or gulfy Dun,

Or Trent, who, like some earth-born Giant, spreads

His thirty arms along the indented meads,

Or sullen Mole, that runneth underneath,

Or Sevren swift, guilty of maiden’s death,

Or rocky Avon, or of sedgy Lea,

Or coaly Tyne, or ancient hallowed Dee,

Or Humber loud, that keeps the Scythian’s name,

Or Medway smooth, or royal-towered Thame.

The rest was prose.

— *The Harvard Classics, Vol. 4, pp. 7–18 (via bartleby.com)*
